# space-4x-management-game
Prototype 4x (explore, expand, exploit, exterminate) real-time space strategy game.

## Introduction

After spending a lot of time with porting/remaking an older 4X real-time space strategy game and playing other games of the type myself, I always found them limiting and or misaligned of my playstyle: exploring, building, mining, trading with little to no interference from others.

Therefore, I decided I want to write my own game that focuses on **exploration**, **colony management**, **resource collection**, **production**, **research and development** and **trading** first while keeping combat and conquest to more like an opt-in during gameplay.

Unfortunately, my 3D skills are nonexistent and my 2D skills are limited to Paintbrush and placing tiles on a 2D surface. Therefore, the game will be in 2D first and will be written in a manner that anticipates moving to 3D one day. 

In addition, It will be a single-player game at first and I'll try to develop it in a multiplayer-friendly manner (unlike that previous remake which may need extensive rewrite). 

The code will be written in Java 8, and once all tooling upgrades, in Java 9.

# Planned features

## Space organization

Five levels of management:

- Galactic overview (see all stars, interact with galactic goals)
- Sector overview (manage resource combination, for example, building capital ships)
- Star system
- Orbit (manage starbases and other space entities)
- Planet surface

Celestial bodies:

- Stars (red, yellow, blue, white, brown, neutron, blackhole)
- Rocky planets (barren, icy, desert, rocky, life-compatible, volcanic)
- Gas planets
- Moons
- Asteroid belts (around the star or around glas planets)
- Tidal locking is possible

### Habitability

- You can build open-air colonies on life-supporting planets.
- You can build outposts on solid-surface planets that require domed habitats.
- Some planets may be inhospitable to organic life entirely (radiation, toxic) where one can build automated outposts only
- Gas planets can't be settled but orbital platform "cities" can be built over it (or around any other planet).
- Asteroid belts allow mining, factory, defense and sensor stations (inhabited, automated).

### Radioactivity

Stars and gas planets have a radiation zone associated with them: the closer something to them is the greater the protection must be. Some planets have natural shielding on their surface.

Buildings and stations can be built/upgraded with radiation shielding.

### Time

The game, by default, will run on a 1 second per day speed. There will be multiple speed options available (likely 0.25 .. 4x).

Celestial bodies will visually orbit their parent entity. Tidal locking affects surface properties such as temperature and radiation at various places. Tilted planets will have seasons where applicable.

### Life

Due to the decidedly less focus on combat and conquest, the galaxy will be filled with other peaceful "empires" - unless you actually attack them, they should not really bother you. Beyond that there will be **pirates** attacking trade convoys and **remnants** protecting star systems and planets. Depending on player actions (activating a device found on one of the planets), an extragalactic invasion fleet may attack the whole galaxy.

## Resources

### Food like

- Water (naturally occurring, vaporated from air, melted ice)
- Oxygen (naturally occurring, splitting water)
- Vegetables (grown naturally, in hydroponics)
- Meat (farms or labs, makes colonists more happy)

### Construction/Production

- Carbon
- Silicates
- Titanium

### Energy

- Hidrogen
- Uranium
- Antimatter
- Dark matter

### Exotic

- Exotic matter

### Monetary

- Crypto-Credits

### Other

- Happiness (sentient)
- Mainteness (automated)
- Research points
- Experience points

## Buildings, stations

TBD

## Ships

### Civilian ships

TBD

### Military ships

TBD

## Ground vehicles

TBD

## Research and development

Researching technologies requires *research points* and other resources and gives access to foundational tech. Research points are generated by **Universities**, **Academic Labs**, space events or reverse engineering. Research points are per star system but for an additional cost, a sector can work towards the more demanding research.

Once researched, the technologies can be improved further through *experience points*. They are generated through studying planets, studying manufacturing operations, studying colony operations, studying fleets and universities (research <-> study). Study points are planned to be universal and can be spent on any tech improvement. It takes time and possibly other resources and are done by **Development labs**.

Multiple research/development projects can happen at the same time. Each project has its minimum and maximum personnel limits. Increasing the personnel count increases costs but decreases time. 

## Manufacturing

TBD

## Trade

This allows trading resources (which have to be actually delivered to the recipient/trade station) and taking basic jobs for credits, resources and/or special items.

### Jobs

These are analogous to side-quests and repeatable quests in other games, most of them with time limits:

- Evacuate planet/station
- Deliver resources to planet/factory
- Construct/build at specific locations
- Manufacture products (commercial and military)
- Gather scientific data
- Move passengers between locations
- Clear out pirate hideout
- Get remnant tech


## Galactic goals

To give some long term purpose, there will be several galactic goals presented to the player which he/she can achieve with or without the other races. This usually involves gathering a massive amount of resources and researching a great deal of technologies. They are all opt-in and multiple of them can be completed within a single play.

- Study the central black hole (better understanding of space-time improving energy production and space/intergalactic travel)
- Build a galactic particle accelerator (better production, weapons, access exotic dimensions?)
- Build an intergalactic ark (travel to a new galaxy, provides research/development points over time)
- Prepare for a nemesis (build up fleets/planets, defeat an extragalactic invader; get resources & technologies)

